hey this is presh tal Walker and you're
watching mind your decisions here's a
really fun problem solve 615 plus x
squared is equal to two to the power of
Y over the integers you're not allowed
to use computers or calculators
I think Luca kizomba le from Georgia for
suggesting this problem and for sending
a solution can you figure it out give
this problem a try and when you're ready
keep watching the video for a solution
[Music]
so how can we solve this equation well
I'll admit that I did not solve this
problem so I resorted to Wolfram Alpha
you can solve equations for integer
solutions for example if you type solve
3x plus 4y is equal to five over the
integers Wolfram Alpha will give you
examples of integer solutions so I
thought since I'm not able to solve this
problem maybe I can get the result from
Wolfram Alpha so I typed it in and to my
great surprise it said the result is
false the examples of integer solutions
that gave were not actual solutions to
this equation over the integers so this
is wrong the problem actually does have
the solution so now let's proceed to
solve a problem that Wolfram Alpha is
not yet able to solve how can we do that
we'll start with the basic observation
since x squared is non-negative 2 to the
power of Y is at least 615 we can then
conclude Y is greater than 9 because 2
to the power of 9 is equal to 512 we
then proceed by considering that if this
equation has a solution both sides need
to have the same last digit so we'll
analyze the very last digit of 615 plus
x squared we'll start out by considering
X the very last digit it could have is
from 0 to 9 so then we consider the last
digit of x squared we take the square of
each of these digits and consider only
the last digit to get the last digit of
615 + x squared we add 5 to each of the
last digits of x squared we now consider
the very last digit of 2 to the power of
Y you can figure this out by doing a few
calculations if you calculate the values
for y is equal to 1 2 3 4 and so on
you'll see a pattern the last digit of 2
to the power of Y will
follow a pattern two four eight six then
the pattern will repeat two four eight
six and so on for every four numbers now
in order that the last digits match we
look at the last digit of six 15 plus x
squared and we want to see which ones
correspond to two four eight or six this
only happens when X is equal to one
three seven or nine and the last digit
will be six or four so for the digits to
match the very last digits X would have
to be 1 3 7 or 9 and Y would have to be
2 4 6 8 and so on
in other words Y would have to be an
even number so we've established that Y
is even and that'll be the key to
solving this problem why does this help
us well if Y is even that means Y is
equal to 2 times n for N and integer we
can then substitute 2 to the N for Y so
we have 6 15 plus x squared is equal to
2 to the power of 2 n we then subtract x
squared from both sides and now we use a
clever trick on the right hand side we
have a difference of squares so we can
use the difference of squares formula
that a squared minus B squared is equal
to the quantity a plus B times the
quantity a minus B in this case we can
factor that 6 15 is equal to the
quantity 2 to the N plus X times 2 to
the N minus X so we're now going to
analyze 615 for 2 factors 2 to the N
plus X and 2 to the N minus X we can do
this by considering the prime
factorization 615 is equal to 3 times 5
times 41 so we consider which two
numbers
what pairs of factors we could have
which would equal 615 we can enumerate
the possibilities
we can have one time 615 we're gonna
have three times 205 5 times 120 3 or 15
times 41 now how can we figure out which
possibility corresponds to our solution
we'll consider adding the two factors
together to the N plus X plus 2 to the N
minus X will equal 2 times 2 to the N
and that simplifies to be 2 to the power
of n plus 1 so the sum of the two
factors is equal to 2 to the power of n
plus 1 so we now consider the sum of the
factors in each of these 4 cases we need
it to be a power of 2 and of these 4
numbers only 128 is a power of 2 so the
sum of factors if there's a solution
would be 128 which equals 2 to the power
of 7 which equals to the power of n plus
1 therefore n is equal to 6 and then Y
is equal to 2 times n which is 12 now
with this knowledge how can we solve for
X while we can consider the difference
of factors 2 to the N plus X minus the
quantity 2 to the N minus X is equal to
2x and that's the difference of the two
factors so now we take the difference of
123 and 5 and we get 118 that's equal to
2x which means X is equal to 59 so if
there's a solution it would have to be X
is equal to 59 and Y is equal to 12 and
in fact we can verify that 615 plus 59
squared is equal to 4096 which exactly
equals 2 to the power of 12 we just
solved a problem that Wolfram Alpha is
not yet able to solve and all we did was
use the principles of number theories I
think that's pretty neat did you figure
it out
thanks for watching this video these
math videos which can be watched for
free on YouTube inspire and build
confidence for people around the world
and they already have over 800 million
views let's share the beauty
mathematics with your help we can amass
the world a better place please
subscribe for free to get the news
videos watch and share all of the videos
on mind your decisions email me a puzzle
or mat topic presh and mind your
decisions calm may be so choose you can
check out my books which are linked in
the video description and you can
support me on patreon for exclusive
rewards thanks for watching and thanks
for your support